Haizi is so clever that he can
communicate with Rob using a new
language system devised specially for
orangutans let's start with an example
from the vocabulary this is the symbol
for Apple and you'll notice that it
starts with a rectangle on the outside
or the exterior and all food symbols
start with a rectangle you notice
there's a diagonal line going from
corner to corner and a dot right in the
center that is the only symbol that will
ever look that way
and that's the only name we'll ever have
for Apple right on cue
in swings the star of the show we start
with these okay we'll sit up so you're
ready to go there you go perfect
Rob uses an intercom system to talk to a
Z through the glass so what we're going
to do is name this food which is an
apple is ready okay
and he tells me when he's ready to go
here just give a little tap on the glass
he's ready for the next question you're
doing great I know it okay let's go now
watch carefully okay I'm going to ask
him to find the name for Apple on his
screen perfect good job good good is
that was exactly right and for AZ that's
a very simple screen at this point he
can work with screens that are actually
much more complex and I'll go ahead and
ask him to use one of the more
complicated screens now same food again
is okay good now I'm going to show him a
very complicated screen good very good
very good
apart from food symbols like banana
perfect is grapes crackers now watch and
carrots there you go
a Z nose over 72 different words
including objects F like cups excellent
well then rub back
he even knows numbers and adjectives but
perhaps the most surprising language
skill is that AZ can use verbs and come
up easy can ask me or tell me to open
something when he uses that diamond
shape symbol with the two lines inside
you tell me what you want me to do with
this first container okay open alright
good that was actually a very good
choice because there's a little
something in there for him
mistakes are actually quite rare he's
into the high 90 ready okay high 90%
accuracy with all the symbols that he
works with now
hey Z's astonishing accuracy
demonstrates not just a strong grasp of
syntax and vocabulary but a razor-sharp
long-term memory I respect active